So, it is a frigid Sunday afternoon and
I am standing in front of the
Metropolitan Detention Center in Sunset
Park, Brooklyn,
which improbably
is where Venezuelan President Nicholas
Maduro and his wife woke up this morning
after their stunning capture by American
troops in Caracus over the weekend.
>> [music]
>> And it's this truly surreal scene
because after 12 years as the all
powerful dictator of a major Latin
American country, a country with
something like 30 million citizens,
Maduro has ended up in this jail
next to the highway a few minutes from
my apartment and a couple blocks from
the nearest Costco.
It's just
such a juxaposition
from what he was just a few days ago to
what he is now. And as best we can tell,
Maduro is going to remain in this
detention center at least until he is
arraigned.
We think as early as Monday morning in
Manhattan. And it's at that point that
the US government is going to present
its charges against him.
And Maduro's future
will suddenly be in the hands of an
American judge and an American jury.
[music]
From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Baro. This is the daily.
Today, the legal case against Nicholas
Maduro and whether the lawfulness of the
extraordinary operation to capture him
could undermine [music]
that case. I spoke with my colleague
Charlie Savage who writes about national
security and legal policy for the Times.
[music]
It's Monday, [music]
January 5th.
>> Charlie, thank you for making time for
us on a Sunday. Appreciate it.
>> My pleasure. Just to orient folks, we
made a special Sunday episode of the
Daily that detailed the entire military
operation that resulted in Nicholas
Maduro's capture and his current
detainment in Brooklyn, not that far
from here. What we want to talk with you
about, Charlie, are all the legal
questions that this entire extraordinary
situation has raised and will probably
keep raising as this case moves through
the court system into presumably a trial
of Maduro. But I want to start with the
military operation itself and the legal
rationale that was used to justify
carrying it out. What kind of legal
precedent exists or doesn't for
undertaking it. The argument that the
Trump administration has put forward,
and we briefly touched on this in our
Sunday episode, is that this was a
military operation in support of an
arrest of somebody charged with breaking
US law. Does that make it lawful?
So, I'm sorry to say that there is not a
simple answer to this. And the reason is
there's two different kinds of law.
There's domestic law. There's
international law. Something that could
be lawful on one level and illegal on
the other level.
>> They operate independently of each
other. And then even worse than that,
sometimes they bleed into each other.
[laughter]
So here, just to provide an overview,
this was probably illegal as a matter of
international law.
>> Why?
>> The United Nations Charter makes it
illegal for a country to use force in
another country's sovereign territory
without its consent, a self-defense
rationale, or the permission of the UN
Security Council.
>> None of which were present.
>> None of these are present here. This was
an arrest operation. So probably illegal
as a matter of international law, as a
matter of pure domestic law, probably
legal. The FBI, the DEA has the ability
to go arrest people who are facing
charges. It has affirmative authority
from Congress to do that. [snorts]
Statutes don't say that that authority
stops at the edge of the United States.
Military can provide support to law
enforcement and carrying out its
authority to arrest people. So maybe
that's okay on an a domestic law level.
But just to add the final twist, there's
the question of well, what about the
fact that the UN charter that makes it
illegal as an international law matter
is a ratified treaty in the United
States and the Constitution says
ratified treaties are the supreme law of
the land.
>> Right? as a matter of domestic
constitutional law. Was this unlawful
because Trump had a constitutional duty
to obey the UN charter?
>> And so this is the mess you have to sort
through to make sense of this
extraordinary operation.
>> And here a precedent in American law and
geopolitical history is important as a
guidepost to sorting through what just
happened this weekend. [music]
Good evening. Thousands of American
troops are tonight holding key positions
in Panama after launching an attack
early this morning to oust the dictator
General Noriega. And that precedent is
the 1989
invasion of Panama by the George HW Bush
administration for the purpose of
arresting Manuel Noriega who like Maduro
was a leader of that country facing drug
trafficking charges back in the United
States.
General Nyega is under indictment for
drugrelated charges and the president
has made every effort peacefully to
resolve the situation through
negotiations under the opaces.
>> General Nora is no longer in power. He
no longer commands the instruments of
government or the forces of repression
uh that he's used for so long to
brutalize the panameanian people. Well,
just explain how the US president at the
time justified entering a foreign
country, Panama, to arrest Noriega,
based on that thicket of complex [music]
legal questions surrounding domestic and
international law.
>> Well, I don't think very many people
think that [music] the 1989 invasion of
Panama was legal as a matter of
international law. In the last half
hour, the United Nations General
Assembly has adopted a resolution
deploring the United States intervention
in Panama.
>> It was declared unlawful overwhelmingly
by the United Nations General Assembly,
>> a majority of the UN Security Council
voted to condemn it, but the United
States of course vetoed that resolution.
So to the extent that the Panama
invasion fairly clearly violated
international law, President George HW
Bush got away with [music] it. There was
no one to say you can't do this in any
effective way.
[music]
So the trickier question for Bush back
in the day was what about domestic law?
And what happened back in 1989 was that
the Justice Department's Office of Legal
Counsel took a look at this issue and it
was then run by a young [snorts]
lawyer named Bill Bar who would someday
become attorney general for Bush and
then reprised that role as attorney
general for Trump.
>> Young Bill Bar had a very expansive view
of executive power. and he wrote a memo
that said that the president had
inherent power under the Constitution to
dispatch the FBI in that case abroad to
carry out its mission of arresting
people who were fugitives from charges.
And the Constitution empowered the
president essentially to override
international law, that it was okay to
violate [clears throat] international
law,
>> at least as a matter of domestic
constitutional law. And that memo by Bar
was very controversial when it came out.
It's been criticized by many legal
scholars who think Bar was wrong about
his approach to analyzing whether or not
a ratified treaty is the kind of law
that the president has a duty to see is
faithfully executed. But that was the
reasoning in 1989.
And I think it's safe to assume that's
probably what the reasoning was for this
weekend as well.
>> Okay, so that's how we should think
about the legality of the operation,
which seems illegal under international
law and is the subject of legally
contested debate under domestic law. I
want to turn to what happened during the
operation. We know that at least 40
Venezuelans,
some number of them civilians, were
killed during Maduro's capture and
extraction. And that's just a
preliminary count likely to go up
perhaps by a lot. Is killing foreign
citizens and soldiers in pursuit of an
arrest like the one we just witnessed,
is that legal? What are the calculations
around using lethal force in a situation
like this? Well, again, as a matter of
international law, the incursion by
American forces was illegal to begin
with, almost certainly.
>> Mhm.
>> From a matter of domestic law, what's
the authority to blow things up in
Venezuela?
Well, this is already an arrest
operation. And from some comments that
Rubio evidently made to Senator Mike
Lee, Mike Lee overnight when this was
happening was saying, "How could this
possibly be legal? I I await the theory
of how the military can go in without a
>> authorization from Congress." Then Rubio
calls him and Lee reports what Rubio
said. And Lee is basically satisfied.
And what it sounds like is they were
blowing up air defenses to protect the
corridor where the helicopters with the
extraction team were going to pass
through. And then also later on, General
Dan Kaine, the chairman of the Joint
Chiefs, said some people shot at the
helicopters and they returned fire.
>> Right?
>> So these are forms of self-defense and
protection. There's a long-standing line
of cases or claims going back to the
late 19th century surrounding the idea
that the president has inherent power
under the Constitution, no need for a
statute from Congress to protect federal
agents, federal institutions carrying
out federal functions. We actually saw
this invocation of the inherent
protective power, as it's called,
recently in court filings around the
dispute about Trump sending troops into
Los Angeles. because they were being
sent in in the name of protecting ICE
agents from protesters. Also, when you
deploy military units, everyone
basically agrees they if someone shoots
at them, they can shoot back to defend
themselves. That's called unit
self-defense. And so that would be both
unit self-defense and a protective power
would be the argument for why blowing
things up and killing people as part of
this operation was lawful as a matter of
US domestic law. So no matter the
legality of the initial action under
international law, once the troops are
in jeopardy, there is a domestic legal
rationale for fighting back using
self-defense, even if that means killing
people.
>> Exactly.
>> Okay. So then there is the question of
what authority the Trump administration
has to control Venezuela now that
Nicholas Maduro has been arrested.
Trump during his news conference after
Maduro's arrest quite explicitly said
that the US will seek to run Venezuela.
He didn't say exactly how that would
work, but he said that the US would seek
to do this. Does the US have legal
grounds for in any way trying to run
Venezuela, right? So, if this is just
Trump telling the vice president of
Venezuela what to do and he's successful
in coercing her to comply,
law doesn't really have anything to do
with it at that point,
>> right?
>> He's just bullying her and it's working.
So the real question is if she bs
and you know resists complying to the
point that the Trump White House wants
to intervene more directly and actually
take the reigns can it and it's very
hard to see how that would be lawful.
Just to go back to Noriega and to
Panama, did this question come up back
then? Did the US seek to control Panama
after arresting Noriega?
>> So what happened in Panama is there had
been an election
earlier in 1989 between a candidate that
was backed by Noriega and a opposition
candidate. And the opposition candidate,
his name was Garmmo Indara, probably
won. But then Noriega just nullified the
results and had some thugs go beat him
up.
>> Good evening. Violence in Panama today
as pro- Noriega forces attacked
opposition leaders and their followers.
>> So when the US came in and grabbed
Noriega, they immediately like that same
night swore in Indara as the actual
president of Panama.
He was sworn in on a US military base.
>> Wow.
>> So that shows you that the US military
had a strong hand in what was happening,
but he was the one making the decisions.
George Bush was not purporting to just
run Panama.
>> So that potentially could be a model for
Trump here. It could be a model, but
you, you know, this is where you get
into the practical issues that make
Venezuela different than Panama [music]
that act as sort of an overlay to these
legal issues we're discussing. You know,
Panama is a small country and the US had
a major base there. [music]
It was not as daunting a task as
thinking about running [music]
Venezuela, vastly more populous, vastly
more geographically sprawling country
where the US has no military presence to
begin with. Venezuelan military is still
there. The government is still there.
They would have to go in with major
ground forces that would presumably need
to fight people before they'd be in a
position to provide support to a newly
sworn in alternative president of
Venezuela. This is not nearly as simple
a situation as Panama was in 1989.
[music]
>> [music]
>> Okay, I think that brings us to the
legal case against Maduro himself. And I
guess the question is does the manner of
his arrest and the legality of it,
especially what is now being described
as the violation of international law in
particular? Does that have any bearing
on whether a US judge will let the
charges against him stand? Could that
end up getting Maduro off the hook
before there's any kind of a trial?
>> Probably not. I'm sure that his lawyers
will raise this issue because they'll
raise every issue. [music] But even if
it were the case that Maduro and his
defense team could make out a strong
case that his arrest was unlawful as a
matter of international law, probably
courts in the US would say that is
irrelevant
and that they still have jurisdiction to
proceed with trying him on this
indictment. M
>> the idea is what matters is the
defendant's presence before the court
[music] and not how he got there. Which
is why we should take a really close
look at [music] the case against Maduro
cuz it sounds from what you're saying
like it's very much going to stand
[music] and we're going to do that right
after the break.
So Charlie, now that we know that the
charges against Maduro
are quite likely to not be tossed out by
a judge based on the manner in which he
was arrested. Let's talk about the legal
case that the US is making against him.
that was the rationale for arresting him
and for detaining him in the US and
that's now going to be the basis for
prosecuting him. What do we know?
>> Well, Madura was originally indicted in
early 2020 during the first Trump
administration in New York on a
complicated
longunning allegation of a cocaine
trafficking conspiracy. The idea was
that he and others who were named in
that indictment had for years worked
with the FARC, the Marxist rebel group
in neighboring Colombia to funnel
cocaine towards the United States and
elsewhere. And he was intimately
involved in this.
>> Right. The claim being not that he
simply let this happen, but that he was
himself deeply deeply involved in it.
>> Yes. was an active participant
conspiring with the FARC to flood the
United States with cocaine as a weapon
essentially and a variety of charges
were attached to those allegations. And
after the seizure of him early Saturday,
>> the Justice Department unveiled a
superseding indictment. So that replaces
that earlier one,
>> changed around some of the defendants,
added some stories, but keeps Maduro at
the heart of what it still alleges is a
yearslong cocaine trafficking
conspiracy.
>> And talk about the evidence that this
superseding indictment lays out to
support this claim that Maduro is an
active participant in this international
drug trafficking conspiracy. So, this is
a very long indictment, 30 pages. This
is not a bare bones, here's some
charges, see you in court. It's what is
sometimes called a speaking indictment
where the prosecutors are using this
filing to tell a story. And it talks
about specific acts that have happened.
The seizure of a cocaine shipment in
Mexico, seizure of one in Paris,
specific conversations Maduro and others
had. It talks about specific bribes that
were handed over, including to his wife,
which was something that was added for
the second one.
>> Mhm. So, we don't know specifically
where all these examples of a conspiracy
are coming from, but there's a lot of
concrete tangible episodes here. This is
not vague, abstract charges. And so what
that tells you is that they have built
over the years a body of evidence that
must include cooperating witnesses
>> who will presumably if there is a trial
come on for the prosecution and say I
saw Maduro say this and I saw was there
in the room when he did that.
>> In fact two of the original people who
were in the 2020 indictment were later
captured and reached plea deals. one in
2023 and one last year.
>> So, I think that it's safe to say that
they as part of the plea deal would have
to cooperate. But the point is that
there's a lot of material here and
there's a story that's unfolding here
that if the prosecutors have the goods
to back it would be what the trial would
look like. Well, given that, how should
we think about what Maduro's defense may
be here? And I want to stipulate. I
understand how early we are in the
process. Maduro just got brought to the
United States. He may not have a lawyer
or just met with his lawyer, but what
might we expect, especially given the
Noriega precedent, that the leader of a
foreign country might argue on his own
behalf against what's in this
indictment?
>> Well, the most important thing that we
saw in the Noriega case that seems
extremely likely to recur here is the
question of immunity. Hm. Leaders of
countries have something called foreign
head of state immunity. And this is an
ancient part of international law that
this the sovereign of an one country
can't be dragged into court, detained,
prosecuted in another country. And
Noriega said, "Hey, I was the head of
state in Panama." And eventually a
district court judge rejected that claim
and an appeals court upheld that ruling.
And so Noriega lost on it. I'm sure
>> that Maduro and his defense team will
raise it again. And he's got a stronger
case than Noriega did.
>> Why?
>> Well, for one thing, Norya wasn't really
in any politically legitimate way the
head of state in Panama. He was a
military officer who had just taken over
in essentially a coup and was running
things behind the scenes. But Panama had
a constitution that said it was supposed
to have a president who was elected. And
so Bush said, "I don't recognize this
guy as the legitimate leader of Panama."
And the Panameanian Constitution didn't
have anything to say about why he could
possibly be the head of state. It
>> it strikes me that the Trump
administration is making a similar
argument, which is that in the case of
Adoro, he is not in their telling the
legitimate leader of Venezuela. He was
brought to power in a fraudulent
election, they claim, and therefore
shouldn't be the president.
>> Correct. There was a lot of fraud in the
2018 election in Venezuela and the 2024
election in Venezuela. In both cases,
Maduro's the declared winner and outside
observers are like, "That was not a
clean election." Mhm.
>> The Trump administration in 2019
withdrew official recognition of Maduro
as the legitimate president of
Venezuela.
Joe Biden in 2024 or early 2025 does the
same. He said, "I'm not recognizing you
as the winner of this election. You are
not the legitimate winner." The
opposition candidate actually won this.
Right.
>> Nevertheless, the governing structures
in Venezuela do recognize him as such.
He does purport to be the president. He
did win an election in 2013 and the
United States did recognize him as the
president at the time. And so that just
puts him in a much stronger position to
make head of state immunity claims than
Noriega ever was. So I'm sure that this
is something that will be litigated
heavily before Maduro's case can ever go
to trial. H I wonder if some of the
things that President Trump has said and
done before and around the arrest of
Maduro are going to at all complicate
the US case against him. And let me give
you two examples. The first is that the
president has very publicly emphasized
that Maduro's arrest is going to be
opening Venezuela up to American
business. In fact, you could argue that
he's put more emphasis on the economic
opportunities
in a Maduro free Venezuela than he has
put on drug trafficking charges in his
public speeches. Does that matter at
all? Does that undermine the president's
case? And for that matter, does the fact
that President Trump pardoned the former
president of Honduras, who was convicted
in the US of major drug trafficking
charges, influence this case at all?
Because it suggests that when it comes
to Trump, he's very selective in
enforcing America's drug policies.
>> So, I think it it both matters a lot and
it matters not at all. It matters a lot
for us watching what's happening, trying
to understand what's really going on in
a real politic account of recent events
and how history will think about the
decision to send forces into Venezuela
to grab Maduro. Clearly, Venezuelan oil
was something Trump was thinking about
and talking openly about,
>> right? In a country that didn't have
those kinds of natural resources, didn't
have this kind of history, would the
same situation have played out? How do
you make sense of Trump in December
pardoning the former president of
Honduras convicted of a drug trafficking
conspiracy here in the United States,
exactly the same charges against Maduro
now, and yet saying it's really
important we got to go after Maduro. It
makes no sense unless there's ulterior
motives and geopolitical interests that
are bigger than was this particular guy
involved in a drug trafficking
conspiracy.
>> Right. Can any of this become part of
Maduro's defense is basically what I'm
curious about. I'm sure that if Maduro's
defense team does what and you would
expect any competent defense team to do,
they will throw everything they can
against the wall and some kind of
vindictive selective prosecution
challenge to the indictment is sitting
right there for the reasons we've just
discussed.
>> Mhm.
>> I'm very doubtful that will work. What
is said around a case by a president,
especially when there's geopolitical
implications, things that go way beyond
law enforcement, is, I'm think, likely
to be found by the court to be just
irrelevant to whether or not this
indictment of him is based on evidence
that he'd committed these acts.
>> But that doesn't mean that it won't be
something that a defense raises and that
will consume a lot of time and create
legal briefs and some headlines along
the way. Understood. Charlie, just
remind us what ultimately ends up
happening with Noriega and the charges
against him after he was captured and
arrested in Panama. So, he brought all
these sorts of challenges, some of which
we've touched on here, but ultimately he
was convicted on by a jury in Miami of
eight of the 10 counts against him, and
he spent the rest of his life in prison.
So, should we think about Noriega's
conviction as validating
Bill Bar's legal argument that what
really matters is not international law?
And if Maduro is found guilty, should we
come to the same conclusion that the
courts are validating this kind of
military operation perhaps twice?
I I just don't think that's the right
way to think about it, Michael. The
courts are not addressing the alleged
violation of international law that the
United States committed by going into
another country's sovereign territory.
The courts are only looking at the
criminal case and allegations against
this particular defendant. But also, I
would say it's pretty early to say,
well, this is going to play out like it
did in 1989.
>> Mhm. And what's going to happen now in
Venezuela
is yet to be seen.
>> Well, to the point about us not knowing
what's going to happen here, what if
Maduro
is found not guilty? Does the US just
return him to Venezuela?
>> So, in a situation which he doesn't
strike some kind of plea deal, goes to
trial, and a jury acquits him,
there's no authority to keep holding
him. M
>> so they would have to let him go
>> right and if that happens presumably
some meaningful amount of time will have
passed during which Maduro is not the
leader of Venezuela anymore. Perhaps the
country moves on, its politics move on
from Maduro, in which case Trump
administration might not prevail in
court, but they could still very much
accomplish the overriding goal of
replacing Maduro as the country's leader
and changing Venezuela's entire
relationship to the US and to American
business.
>> Well, I I do think that that's likely.
I mean, the history has happened now.
Maduro is physically removed from
Venezuela, even in a scenario in which
he is acquitted. That's a long time from
now. This is not going to be something
that happens next week or even next
year. We've talked about all kinds of
stuff that's going to have to [music] be
litigated before there can be a trial,
immunity claims, and so forth. That's
going to have to go up to the [music]
Supreme Court. And I don't think Trump
will even still be president when
whatever happens in this case is over.
[music]
And so in the meantime, it's hard to see
a scenario in which Maduro, even if
acquitted, goes back to Venezuela and is
still president.
This seems irreversible.
Well, Charlie, [music] thank you very
much. We appreciate it.
>> Thank you.
On Sunday, [music]
the United States and Venezuela
continued to publicly wrangle over the
role of the United States in Venezuela's
future. In Miami, Secretary of State
Marco Rubio outlined a plan to coersse
Venezuela's leaders rather than govern
the country. [music] a plan President
Trump reinforced with what appeared to
be a threat against Venezuela's interim
president Deli [music] Rodriguez. In an
interview with The Atlantic magazine,
Trump said, [music] quote, "If she
doesn't do what's right, she's going to
pay a very big price, [music]
probably bigger than Maduro."
Meanwhile, in Caracus, [music]
Rodriguez struck a consiliatory tone,
saying in a statement that she sought
cooperation and coexistence with the
United States. "Our people and our
region," she wrote, deserve peace
[music] and dialogue, not war.
We'll be [music] right back.
Here's
[music] what else you need to know
today. Over the weekend, congressional
Democrats complained that they were
still [music] being kept in the dark
about the military operation in
Venezuela despite their demands for
classified briefings about the mission.
White House officials claimed that
because the operation was in support of
[music] an arrest and not an invasion of
Venezuela, they were not obligated to
consult with Congress [music]
either beforehand or afterhand.
But that claim drew protest from
lawmakers like Representative Jim Hines
of Connecticut, the ranking member of
the House [music] Intelligence
Committee.
>> It's been more than 24 hours. Have you
been briefed by anybody in the
administration?
Still haven't got a phone call. Look,
this is a long pattern and a
particularly egregious example of a
pattern of this administration not
giving a hoot about the United [music]
States Congress, which by the way,
today's episode was produced by Ricky
Netski and Nina Feldman. It was edited
by Michael Benois [music] and Patricia
Willins. Contains music by Marian
Lozano, Alicia Baube, Dan Powell, and
Rowan [music] Yisto. and was engineered
by Chris Wood.
[music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Babaro. See you tomorrow.